[DO NOT MERGE] [WIP] Updates to monitor applications (#9376)
auth0/docs: articles/monitoring/guides/monitor-applications.md

---

> title: Monitor application

Reviewer: Can we revert to "applications", or change to "Monitor Auth0"?

Author: yup, will revert. I prefer "applications" because "monitor auth0" makes me feel we put the responsibility on the customer...

  - synthetic-transactions
---
# Monitor Applications

> Auth0 is a critical dependency of your application and/or service. Monitoring Auth0's health can be important as it allows you to report specific errors to your customers and/or take mitigating actions in case of an issue with Auth0.

Reviewer: Auth0 **can be** a critical dependency [...]

Author: in what cases isn't it? We don't want to claim things that aren't true but I can't think of a customer that wouldn't think of auth0 as a critical dependency. Can we acknowledge that?

Reviewer 2: I agree, we are always critical :)

Reviewer 3: Maybe something like:

Your applications and services depend on Auth0. Monitoring Auth0's health lets you report specific errors to customers or reduce user impact in case there's an issue with Auth0.

> You can monitor Auth0 using many approaches, each of them complementary with the others. Picking the approaches to use depends on your needs and investment possibilities.

Reviewer 3: Maybe something like:

There's many ways to monitor Auth0 and each approach complements the others. Picking the right approach depends on your needs and investment possibilities.

## Synthetic transactions

> The simplest approach to monitor Auth0. This involves setting up a periodic request to perform an authentication transaction. If the request works successfully, Auth0 is working fine. If the request fails this _might_ indicate an with Auth0.

Reviewer: If the request fails this _might_ indicate an **issue** with Auth0.

> The simplest approach to monitor Auth0. This involves setting up a periodic request to perform an authentication transaction. If the request works successfully, Auth0 is working fine. If the request fails this _might_ indicate an issue with Auth0.

Reviewer 3: The simplest approach to monitor Auth0:

- Set up a periodic request to perform an authentication transaction.
- If the request succeeds, Auth0 is working fine.
- If the request fails, this may indicate:
  - an issue with Auth0
  - an issue specific to the tenant used for the synthetic transaction
  - or just a single failed request.

> There _might_ be an issue with Auth0, but the issue could also either be specific to the tenant used for the synthetic transaction or just a single failed request.

> For synthetic transactions we recommend using setups that are close to your production tenant configuration as possible, potentially even using the same production tenant. Since setting up synthetic transactions with redirect flows and third party providers can be tricky, using the [Resource Owner Password Grant](/api-auth/tutorials/password-grant) is recommended. This flow does neither involve browser redirects nor require a UI.

Reviewer: [...] party providers can be tricky, *and* using the [...]

Author: no. the part after the comma is the recommendation for the part before. no "and"

> For synthetic transactions we recommend using setups that are close to your production tenant configuration as possible, potentially even using the same production tenant. Since setting up synthetic transactions with redirect flows and third party providers can be tricky, using the [Resource Owner Password Grant](/api-auth/tutorials/password-grant) is recommended. This flow neither involves browser redirects nor requires a UI.

Reviewer 3: For synthetic transactions, use an environment as close to your production tenant configuration as possible. You may potentially even use the same production tenant. Since setting up synthetic transactions with redirect flows and third party providers can be tricky, using the [Resource Owner Password Grant](/api-auth/tutorials/password-grant) is recommended. This flow doesn't involve browser redirects or require a UI.

Author: will take some of this. I want to avoid using "environment" as we will be using that differently in the future

> For synthetic transactions we recommend using setups that are close to your production tenant configuration as possible, potentially even using the same production tenant. Since setting up synthetic transactions with redirect flows and third party providers can be tricky, using the [Resource Owner Password Grant](/api-auth/tutorials/password-grant) is recommended. This flow does neither involve browser redirects nor require a UI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For synthetic transactions we recommend using setups that are close to your production tenant configuration as possible, potentially even using the same production tenant. Since setting up synthetic transactions with redirect flows and third party providers can be tricky, using the [Resource Owner Password Grant](/api-auth/tutorials/password-grant) is recommended. This flow neither involves browser redirects nor requires a UI.
```

> If you are using [rules](/rules) or [custom database connection(s)](/connections/database/custom-db) or other extensibility points, the synthetic transaction(s) should be configured to go through their logic.

Reviewer: Should we be capitalizing Rules, Custom Database Connections, and Extensibility?

Author: will defer to tech writers

Author: @erjohnson what do you think about this one?

> If you are using [rules](/rules) or [custom database connection(s)](/connections/database/custom-db) or other extensibility points, the synthetic transaction(s) should be configured to go through their logic.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are using [rules](/rules) or [custom database connection(s)](/connections/database/custom-db) or other extensibility points, the synthetic transaction(s) should be configured to go utilize that logic to quickly detect any logic errors in those scripts.
```

Author: I was thinking that this was useful to find extensibility issues, but not to find errors in those scripts. I don't want people to test their scripts like that

Reviewer 2: I think it covers both.  When we work with customers we encourage them to use ROPG so that their rules and custom DB scripts are executed as a canary.  Obviously they should be testing their stuff before it gets to prod as well.

Maybe this instead:
```suggestion
If you are using [rules](/rules) or [custom database connection(s)](/connections/database/custom-db) or other extensibility points, the synthetic transaction(s) should be configured to utilize the rules and/or custom DB scripts to ensure that aspect of the system is working.
```

Tools like [Pingdom](http://pingdom.com) make setting up synthetic transactions a simple thing.

### Check Period

> We recommend synthetic transactions happen with a periodicity of one minute. For this simple monitoring approach, that's a frequency that will not consume a lot of your Auth0 rate limit quota, while also providing timely responses if an issue were to be happening.

Reviewer 3: We recommend running synthetic transactions on one minute intervals. With this simple approach, that frequency won't consume a lot of your Auth0 rate limit quota, while also providing timely responses.

### Limitations of synthetic transactions

> Synthetic transactions do not represent your end user's experience, but instead aim to provide a proxy metric for them. They might not be exercising the same flows your users are, they should be run every minute and naturally do not report on errors your end users might have seen. However, they are a simple and inexpensive way of getting good signal on the health of an Auth0 tenant.

Reviewer: Should we remove "they should be run every minute"? It seems redundant from the previous line.

Author: leaving to explain why this is not accurate but making some tweaks

> Synthetic transactions do not represent your end user's experience, but instead aim to provide a proxy metric for them. They might not be exercising the same flows your users are, they lack atomicity (typically run once a minute) and do not report on errors your end users might have seen. However, they are a simple and inexpensive way of getting good signal on the health of an Auth0 tenant.

Reviewer 3: Synthetic transactions are a simple and inexpensive way monitoring an Auth0 tenant's health. However, they do have some limitations:

- Synthetic transactions do not represent your end user's experience. Instead they give you a proxy metric for them.
- Synthetic transactions might not use the same flows as your users
- They lack atomicity (typically run once a minute) and do not report on errors your end users might have seen.

If you are interested in getting more granular data read about [Error Tracking](#error-tracking) and [Metrics and Logs](#metrics-and-logs).

## Error Tracking
This approach is useful to track errors in existing calls to Auth0. It involves reporting errors whenever a call to Auth0 fails. [Sentry](https://sentry.io/) is a tool commonly used for these cases, which works both on frontend and backend scenarios.

> This approach is useful because it allows you to know about real errors that your end users are experiencing. However, because you are only tracking errors (and not all requests) it is not possible to get an accurate perception of "how many" end users are affected: is it 1% of 5%? It also doesn't require you to set up a separate "synthetic call", which might consume part of your rate limit quota, especially if misconfigured.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This approach is useful because it allows you to know about real errors that your end users are experiencing. However, because you are only tracking errors (and not all requests) it is not possible to get an accurate perception of "how many" end users are affected: is it 1% or 5%? It also doesn't require you to set up a separate "synthetic call", which might consume part of your rate limit quota, especially if misconfigured.
```

## Metrics and logs
This approach is useful if calls to Auth0 are performed from a backend you control. This is the case for:
- Most calls to [Auth0's Management API](https://auth0.com/docs/api/management/v2)
- Calls to the [Authentication API](https://auth0.com/docs/api/authentication) from Regular Web Applications and Machine-to-machine applications (learn more about client types [here](https://auth0.com/docs/applications)).

> Some observability products also allow you to report metrics/logs from frontend and mobile applications.

> The approach consists in using metrics and/or logs to track error rates on calls to Auth0. Metrics/logs report error rates that accurately describe what end users are experiencing, without requiring to set up a separate "synthetic call", which might consume part of your rate limit quota, especially if misconfigured.

Reviewer: The last part is redundant to what we say in "Error Tracking".

Author: I don't expect someone to read the doc every time so I'd want sections to be self contained. will leave for tech writers to decide

> The approach consists in using metrics and/or logs to track error rates on calls to Auth0. Metrics/logs report error rates that accurately describe what end users are experiencing, without requiring to set up a separate "synthetic call", which might consume part of your rate limit quota, especially if misconfigured.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The approach consists of using metrics and/or logs to track error rates on calls to Auth0. Metrics/logs report error rates that accurately describe what end users are experiencing, without requiring you to set up a separate "synthetic call", which might consume part of your rate limit quota, especially if misconfigured.
```

## Alerting

> Regardless of which approach you use, it is common that you will want to get an alert/a page when one of them starts seeing errors happen at a particular rate. That rate depends on your application.

Reviewer: Could we just say "an alert" as a more generic term here?

Author: nope. some products treat alerts as high/low, but a page is a page. those are different
